---
title: "Why I Don’t Vibe Code"
source: "https://jacobharr.is/personal/i-dont-vibe-code"
author:
  - "[[jacobharr.is]]"
published: 2026-03-05
created: 2026-05-19
description: "A “brief” accounting of various reasons why vibe coding has just never clicked for me personally as a developer."
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
There has been a lot of discussion online lately about vibe coding and and how Large Language Models (LLMs) will revolutionize the field of software development. Every new model will launch us into realms of pure productivity, shipping software at the speed of thought and removing all the friction and overhead of product development. Or something like that.

Maybe. I’ll have to take your word for it. I don’t vibe code.

If it’s working for you, great! I’m not really here to argue the merits or flaws of LLMs at depth here in this piece, but it’s just never clicked for me personally. This page is a “brief” accounting of various reasons why.

## I’m a Cheapskate

I’m not a purist. I’ve tried using LLMs that are integrated into an IDE. They have been useful for some tasks that are simple enough to be easily describable but annoying enough to not just do them myself. For instance, resizing [a grid of square images to be smaller](https://jacobharr.is/projects/sky-gradients). I *could* go look at the command-line arguments for ImageMagick, but that was a perfect thing to ask the AI to do. I then tried using one of the AI tools to analyze my code in a project and a few other small tasks before it all came to an awkward halt. The system informed me that I had just run out of credits and I would need to provide a credit card to purchase more tokens I wanted to keep going.

Now, you must understand that I come from a long line of cheapskates from both sides of my family tree. We’ve been pinching pennies and hunting bargains for centuries both here and on the other side of the Atlantic. As an example, one of my distant ancestors died during the [King Philip’s War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_Philip's_War) because he left the safety of the fort to retrieve some cheese he had left behind when evacuating his house. So you must believe me that the idea of paying a service in perpetuity so I could *think* just seemed so laughably absurd and horrific that I didn’t even bother giving them my card. I closed the laptop. I uninstalled the IDE and went back to using [Emacs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emacs) even. And I realized that I just didn’t even notice the lack anymore.

## I’m Old

It does help that I’m old. I’ve been writing code for a long time, especially in an industry that calls a developer with 5 years of experience a “senior engineer.” Experience is a welcome antidote to anxiety sometimes (*as long as it’s not anxiety about ageism in an industry that calls a developer senior with only 5 years of experience*), and the AI hype doee remind me of earlier breakthroughs in low and no-code tooling. I don’t doubt that AI can be a useful tool for developers. I know there are tasks it can help with as better tooling. But these arguments always leave me thinking about the accidental and essential complexity again.

[Fred Brooks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Brooks) was old even when I was a young coder myself. As the project manager for IBM’s System 360 line of mainframes (and accompanying operating system) he had a front row seat to when all the now common ways software projects go wrong were novel and new. He collected these observations in a book *[The Mythical Man-Month](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month)* which should still be required reading for software engineering courses today. My edition was a newer reprint that included a later essay titled “ [No Silver Bullet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Silver_Bullet) ” where Brooks looked at the effect that new tools can have on developer productivity. To think like a programmer, you must understand that the real world is complex. Programming can be best thought of as imposing simplified representations – we call them *\_abstractions* – on top of our messy reality to make it understandable by reducing complexity. This lets us generalize specific situations into layers that can be built on top of each other. For instance the specific action of putting peanut butter onto a piece of bread could be generalized into a spread(substance) method that could take peanut butter or cream cheese as an argument. And we could use these spread methods to create higher-level functions like create\_pbj() and so on. Coding in a modern high-level programming language is like standing on top of a ziggurat of abstractions, where a single line of code could trigger millions of operations on multiple systems. It’s very exciting!

Now, what if we could keep going and abstract away the act of programming itself? This is the dream of agentic AI, where swarms of agents can be given tasks to implement on their own without supervision. Sounds great! But this is addressing what Brooks calls *accidental complexity*, the things that are complicated about writing code itself. In the time since the essay was written, software development has made great strides against this type of complexity. Instead of writing in low-level machine code, we can use modern dynamically interpreted languages which are compiled to assembly. Instead of remembering how to write a [quick sort](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ywWBy6J5gz8) (*trust me, you’re going to want to click that link*) from scratch, I just need to call a sort method in a standard library. Instead of having to build a whole web application from scratch, I can use an existing framework. If I want to rename or restructure some code, my editor can help do that for me. AI seems like the latest iteration and some editors have already replaced their predictable old tooling for renaming and refactoring code with unpredictable AI agents. Sure, it might seem like rolling the dice, but how common is a [critical failure](https://rpgmuseum.fandom.com/wiki/Critical_failure) anyway?

However, even as the better tooling has diminished accidental complexity, *essential complexity* still remains. There still is the complicated work of designing our abstractions and systems the right way, one that is elegant, clear and maintainable. And that complexity isn’t going anywhere. This type of work takes skill and experience and wisdom hard-won from system failures past. And, I’m not sure if LLM’s fancy autocomplete approach works so well with this type of complexity, which often isn’t so straightforward to solve. Maybe with prompting, it could be guided toward a preferred approach, but at that point the person doing the guiding might as well design the approach alone, since the LLM wouldn’t be able to articulate why it chose a certain path. Essential complexity is often weird and rare and messy. Maybe I’m wrong and the models are getting better at these kind of messy situations as well, but I’ve found that it often requires a specific kind of mindset and approach. Luckily for me, I love the messy stuff.

## I Love Mess

I’ve been talking so far about how software can abstract processes, but we also use abstraction’s reductive properties as a tool to understand the world. In the classic book *[Seeing Like a State](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300078152/seeing-like-a-state/)*, James Scott describes how the motivating project of the post-enlightenment was to make their populations and possessions *legible* through abstraction and categorization. To measure is to modify. For instance, a country might begin to look at its forests not as complex ecosystems but just assessed by their percentages of timber that can be used for ship-building. This view then allows a country to act on this information in ways like replacing those forests with monocultures of just a single tree. A forest is abstracted into a system for growing ship masts.

This approach created the bureaucracy and the paper form, which has evolved into the web form and database. As programmers, we need to reduce the messy data of the world in order to act on it. We expect [our dates to be exact](https://gist.github.com/timvisee/fcda9bbdff88d45cc9061606b4b923ca). We expect [names to be relatively simple](https://www.kalzumeus.com/2010/06/17/falsehoods-programmers-believe-about-names/). We expect data to be complete at time of entry and consistent over time. Every programmer and every system design is a series of [Procrustean](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procrustes) choices about what aspects of reality we want to reflect in our systems and what we can discard. I’m not saying this to criticize; this approach is the only way to build systems that aren’t bogged down in an endless thicket of special situations (what we call “edge cases” because they’re supposed to be rare paths on the periphery). But, this process is so innate that we sometimes forget that it is also artificial, especially when it’s describing people. [Forcing a gender field to only accept “male” or “female”](https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/passports/passport-help/sex-marker.html) doesn’t force gender itself to be binary. Our definitions of [race are social constructions that shift all the time](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/10/16/us/census-race-ethnicity.html?unlocked_article_code=1.QlA.hsUD.Zln08WoXHt_3&smid=url-share). Our simplified model might provide us with insights (*autism diagnoses have increased 300% over the last 20 years!*) but not capture the underlying factors behind those insights (*it’s likely just a result of [changes in how we define autism and increased screening](https://publichealth.jhu.edu/2025/is-there-an-autism-epidemic)*). It’s important to step back and look at the bigger picture of how any model was made and what type of knowledge it doesn’t capture. Every abstraction is also an occlusion. As a data journalist, I learned how to interview data and how to be highly rigorous about all the ways in which the answers I found could be misleading. Paranoia is the data journalist’s best friend, if you want to avoid [an embarrassing correction.](https://jacobharr.is/published/times-regrets-error.html). You need to be able to think about not just what the data says, but all the stuff it doesn’t include.

Unfortunately, this metacognition is something an LLM can’t ever do. The model is their reality. As Robin Sloan succinctly notes in his compelling essay [“Are Language Models in Hell?”](https://www.robinsloan.com/lab/language-models-hell/), AI models are built from and view the world in a stripped-down way. Where you and I might look at text and see its context (things like the text formatting and titles, the author’s bio, the site where this was linked from), the LLM operates purely on a world of letters and nothing more (technically, they’re receiving subword tokens, which is [why early models couldn’t count the letter ‘r’ in strawberry](https://www.secwest.net/strawberry)). Asking a LLM to recognize the limitations of its view on reality is like [asking a goldfish how the water is](https://fs.blog/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water/).

When I was writing this section, I have been thinking about [DOGE’s inept attempts to find fraud at the Social Security Administration](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/16/us/politics/doge-social-security.html?unlocked_article_code=1.Q1A.XJp3.4fxPQ8FD7iNl&smid=url-share). In one example, DOGE looked at the SSA databases and discovered there were over 9 million records in there with birth dates over 120 year ago but no death dates recorded. Elon Musk declared the only possible explanation was that millions of people were fraudulently receiving benefits. He was wrong about [both the cause of the problem and the severity of its impact](https://crr.bc.edu/150-year-olds-arent-getting-social-security-heres-a-better-task-for-doge/). DOGE could’ve questioned the data quality. They could’ve examined payments being made. They could’ve asked any of the experts at SSA to explain it to them. But instead they took the data as it is and leaped to wrong conclusions, a pattern they repeated over and over (as in this example of a different fraud claim about payments):

> In the extensive analysis that followed, agency experts carefully documented fallacies in DOGE’s work, according to documents reviewed by The Times and those people.
> 
> “These payments are valid,” Sean Brune, an acting deputy commissioner, wrote in a memo examining one of the issues. (A Treasury spokeswoman declined to comment.)
> 
> But Mr. Russo, who did not respond to a request for comment, said that DOGE would not trust career civil servants, according to people familiar with his statements. Instead, he insisted that Akash Bobba — a 21-year-old who had interned at Palantir and become one of DOGE’s lead coders — conduct his own analysis.

In their own wild ways, the DOGE crew were replicating the same operating conditions for themselves that cause LLMs to go astray. They refused to consider alternative explanations that were outside of what the data told them. They talked to nobody outside of their own circle. They latched onto a simplified explanation that was appealing to them because it completely validated their worldview of incompetent government staff and rampant fraud everywhere.

This is not a rare situation. I myself am mortified by the possibility of looking like a dumbass, so I don’t ever want to outsource my data analysis to an LLM. But, of course many people do. I fear this problem will only get worse.

## Friction is a Gift

The appeal of LLM-driven development is that it’s supposed to eliminate friction. Boosters spin tales of development teams shipping dozens of features in a single day, using multiple teams of agents working autonomously at their command in [increasingly strange topologies](https://steve-yegge.medium.com/welcome-to-gas-town-4f25ee16dd04). And I get it, software development can be tedious and frustrating. It must feel super exciting to be able to churn out code at relatively ludicrous speeds and play with polished products instead of prototypes.

I need the friction though.

When I am first learning a new language or framework, I struggle with friction to do even the most basic tasks. It sucks! And when am working with a new and unfamiliar code repository or data source, I need to set aside hours to scrutinize it. I often find myself doing a [close reading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Close_reading), pulling up specific files to look over line by line until I understand their context and the choices their developers made. I know I could just ask an LLM to summarize the project for me and save myself the time, but I’ve found I need this process to really marinate in the code. I need it to not just understand the choices the developers made, but *why* they made them and how they reflect the constraint or idioms of the language they are using. I learn by failing, and if the LLM takes that work away from me, I won’t really understand what I’m doing.

Even when working in familiar languages and my own code, I still rely heavily on friction as a clue. When writing the code becomes hard, that tells me that I’m going down a wrong path with the current architecture, and that I should seriously consider redesigning things to make future enhancements easier. When that happens, I usually go out for a long walk (or sign off for the day) to give my brain space to step back and consider things from a new angle. It really works. I find these pauses so effective that I will even force it upon myself when the way seems clear. When working on large software projects, I will wait to start coding a new feature until I’ve written an [Architectural Decision Record](https://adr.github.io/) first that describes what I want to do. These documents force me to capture what I’m thinking at this point in time, my assumptions about the problem and the ramifications of my approach. Sometimes, it even makes me realize I was too enamored with my initial hunch to see how it would go astray, and it always serves a good way to capture “what were they thinking?” for any future inheritors of my work.

The LLM-driven approach to friction is to just code your way through it without rethinking anything. And the LLM will oblige. It’ll probably make code that will work. The performance metrics will be fine, the tests will pass (especially if they also were written by the LLM). But it won’t know why it chose that path. It doesn’t feel friction and can’t explain if one architectural approach felt cleaner than another. If the engineers crafting the prompts lack the insight to know what is a good approach or a bad one, they get stuck in a dynamic of asking the AI to code its way through friction over and over again. This can result in a thicket of weird abstractions, and the only design documentation for future teams is a single Markdown file that contained the instructions for an AI model used a few years back. Good luck reconstructing the architectural decisions from that! It is telling that most of the vibe coding success stories I’ve seen have been by developers who are already experts in what they are asking the LLM to build (and who are thus able to guide its work), or for situations where the stakes of failure are low. For the everything else, we just have to figure out how to know [if the rest of the fucking owl](https://www.reddit.com/r/funny/comments/eccj2/how_to_draw_an_owl/) is any good and safe to use.

I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention one other thing that bothers me when LLM promoters invoke friction as a problem. Most of the LLM marketing in advertisements, live demos and LinkedIn posts that I’ve seen portrays a solitary engineer (or perhaps a single team) heroically using LLM-driven coding to blast out some sort of app or website and launch it quickly (*our velocity and KPI is through the roof!*). But industry really wants developers to use LLMs for work, where the friction is usually established processes and practices to keep defects or even poorly-conceptualized features from making it to production. Inevitably, the need to prioritize LLM-driven velocity is turned against people themselves – other engineers or team-mates in product or project management or testing or compliance or design. Because those roles are seen as friction too. Who needs user research when we can craft AI personas? Who needs design when we have AI tools to spit out web layouts? Who needs project managers when *we* are the managers of our army of agents? What if we didn’t need to wait for another developer to review our pull request and just automatically merge code that passes tests and scans? **What if we didn’t have to spend any of our work time talking to other people and just could live in the realm of pure coding?** But, software development is a collaborative process, and each member of the team helps make a good product what it is. Removing those roles or replacing them with LLM-inflected ghosts will certainly allow teams to move faster, but it doesn’t mean the products that they deliver will be better. And the process will certainly be a lot lonelier.

## I Care A Lot

Perhaps my simplest reason for not using LLMs is that I just love programming so much that I don’t want to hand it off to a machine. In much the same way I wouldn’t resort to AI if I were an artist or a musician, programming is one way for me to express my creativity, and I will not cede that joy. Although [it can be extremely frustrating at times](https://bukk.it/drawing-vs-drawing.jpg), there is a profound delight in shaping something from a nebulous idea into a real system, especially if it involves an elegant implementation or interesting problems. Some evenings, I close the work laptop and open the personal laptop to dive into some new fun thing I want to build. And when I am building software professionally as part of a team, that is even better! I love the collaboration and the process of shaping software together, especially the ways in which people will step up and take ownership of problems. I don’t think the dynamic is the same when the team is just taking ownership of prompts and the LLM assistant is doing the work. Or the LLM assistant is replacing parts of the team.

Ownership is important. Over the past few decades, I’ve worked in roles where I’ve developed a strong sense of personal responsibility. As a data journalist, an error in code could lead to an embarrassing correction or a devastating lawsuit. In civic technology, errors can mean catastrophic failures in providing services and benefits, whether it’s to an entire vulnerable population or to a single person. I’m not going to say that I’ve never made mistakes, but I care a lot about getting it right because I care about the mission of the work. I have been privileged to work on teams with many other people who also care and want to do the best they can for people. An LLM can’t care. Sure, it [can do a convincing job of pretending](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=thsuwFAqc7U), but it’s still just a facsimile of a mind stringing together words that are more likely to be associated with other. It’s not bothered by its mistakes or trying to do better, because [it has no inner consciousness](https://www.noemamag.com/the-mythology-of-conscious-ai/), let alone a conscience. It can never be held accountable, and I can never hand off my moral responsibilities to it for that reason.

When the LLM does well, it’s a genius that will replace all coders. When the LLM deletes all of your infrastructure or “lies” about tests, it’s your fault. After all, you just needed to structure your prompts and workflows exactly the right way so it will jostle the LLM into giving the correct output. Oops, try again. And again. Much of the LLM advice I’ve read emphasizes that you must give all the necessary instructions and amendments and codicils up front or the system will do things wrong. This mindset is a significant departure from agile programming, which emphasizes frequent course corrections and feedback and trusting in your team to do the right thing. Instead, we seem to be retreating to a new usage model similar to the [time-sharing models of early computers](https://www.ibm.com/history/time-sharing) in the 1950s. Except here, instead of walking up to hand in a sheaf of punch cards, the solitary programmer is instead bringing legal documents to be turned into programs.

I jest; there is no legal liability at play here. It’s probably not surprising given the similar demographics involved, but LLM suppliers are repeating the same dynamic as Tesla. [New features are being rolled out to user without safety testing](https://www.fastcompany.com/91500914/elon-musks-self-driving-delusions-get-a-reality-check) and, just as strangely, LLM boosters, like Tesla superfans, [often blame themselves and others for catastrophic outcomes](https://alexeyondata.substack.com/p/how-i-dropped-our-production-database) by saying the users should’ve done better in writing their prompts. I’m not really sure what to make of this, but it bothers me that technology is standardizing a capitalism where more risks are being borne by consumers because companies and government have both abdicated their responsibilities. [We banned lawn darts after they killed a single child](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawn_darts), but chatbots driving users to death and psychosis are accepted as the price of innovation in AI. Will things change when vibe coding itself leads to someone dying from system failures rather than [dying of embarassment](https://futurism.com/artificial-intelligence/claude-wife-photos)?

Coding has also been my comfort when times are hard. There is research that [playing Tetris is an effective way to avoid PTSD](https://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2017-03-28-tetris-used-prevent-post-traumatic-stress-symptoms). The theory is that the therapy works because engaging the parts of the brain that handle arranging and rotating shapes hinders the formation of traumatic memories. Now, I am fortunate enough to not suffer from PTSD (and I am not making light of people who do), but I do also relate to this concept. Programming feels like a complicated puzzle and has sometimes been my solace in dark times. As the example above hints at, I know a lot about DOGE, because for the past year [I’ve been building and maintaining a system to track their rampage](https://dogetrack.info/). Unlike a work project, this has been an exercise in assembling datasets to provide clarity into an organization that wants to stay obscured. It’s been a rewarding exercise and a way for me to channel my despair into something I hope will be useful. This isn’t the only time I’ve used code [as a way to work through my sadness](https://jacobharr.is/projects/times-haiku.html), and it works because it *is* work and the process would be diminished if I only focused on the product.

## A Few Other Silly Reasons

This has already proven to be a much longer piece than I expected, especially since it was originally just a few short posts on Bluesky. Before I close it out, a few more quick reasons!

First, I absolutely hate the [unctuous tone that AI chatbots default take by default](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VecinjfP8Bk). As someone who grew up in a city on the East Coast, I get really suspicious when someone is weirdly super nice to me without me knowing them, because it usually means they’re either about to launch into a scam or proselytize to me. Reading LLM chat transcripts makes my skin crawl. Yes, I am aware I could make the LLM adopt a whole different tone, but somehow that makes the idea feel even worse.

Like many developers, I have a whole folder of draft hobby projects that have never been finished. For instance, there’s the one where I was going to write a clone of Spelling Bee, but it was going to be in Clojurescript so I could use the [Blabrecs](https://mkremins.github.io/blabrecs/) code to generate non-words and make it super frustrating. Okay, I guess that would’ve just been funny to me. You had to be there. From the LLM perspective, these are folders of failures and I could indeed use LLM to make an app a day or whatever challenge I want. However, the process was far more important than the product (again!). Not every whimsy needs to become a reality. Often, I get more from the fun of brainstorming and the process of learning enough to know that I don’t need to continue and finish the job. It’s easy to forget this sometimes.

This wasn’t going to be an essay about the morality of using LLMs for my work. Not because I don’t care, but because many others have written far more effectively than me about the fraught implications of this technology. And at this moment where LLMs are bombing schools with children or generating child porn on demand, I really don’t feel comfortable using them. And I don’t feel comfortable not mentioning this aspect at all. It may be true that there is no ethical consumption under capitalism, but I’ll be damned if I’m not going to at least try. We can’t build a better world with tools that immiserate so many.

Weirdly, nobody seems more miserable than LLM boosters. I might be more swayed if developers were using their newfound productivity gains to finally live that [4-hour workweek](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_4-Hour_Workweek) that nerds were pretending to idolize 10 years ago. But perversely, it seems like many in Silicon Valley are outsourcing work to the AI agents and then using [their newfound spare time to do even more work](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-Z0iyBNxpk). Instead of using their time for relaxation or art or joy, they’re embracing [9-9-6](https://www.forbes.com/sites/bryanrobinson/2025/08/04/the-9-9-6-work-schedule-could-be-coming-to-your-workplace-soon/) work schedule and a hyper-quantified workplace that would make even [Frederick Taylor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_management) blanch in horror. It’s possible that the LLM revolution will finally come for me and my job, but I’d rather not work myself into the grave first.

## Now What?

I don’t pretend to know the future. Maybe the technology will advance to such a point I will regret my lack of experience and familiarity. Or, maybe it’ll stagnate and the whole financial house of cards will come tumbling down. If that happens, I hope we can rebuild software development into the humane practice of building a better world, one line of code at a time.